There are many different tools that people use to assist themselves with their [[Writing Enhancement Systems|writing ability]] in many different contexts. While many of these are [[Evaluation Tools|evaluation tools]] that focus upon giving general feedback to the user, other tools including the many different autocorrect functions that are nearly omnipresent when working with technology focus upon more specific feedback.
### Examples

The aforementioned autocorrect functionality found in phones, Microsoft Word, and similar devices and applications is the simplest example of a composition aid. These systems work to evaluate whether a word is spelled correctly and that the typist is using correct grammar. In either case, the system reports the found error to the user, prompting them to take action.

Tools like [Grammarly](https://www.grammarly.com/) try to take this a step further, providing deeper analysis of grammatical issues while also attempting to detect other concerns like long running sentences as well as overused passive voice. Notably, though Grammarly advertises itself as aiding [[Writing using AI Models|writing using AI]], this is only true of the paid version and the free version does not use AI.
### Effectiveness

Many experiments such as the one described in [Dizon and Gayed's paper](https://www.castledown.com.au/journals/jaltcall/article/view/jaltcall.v17n2.336) have been conducted to evaluate the effectiveness of composition aids such as Grammarly. The results are generally positive, with a noticeable comparative improvement in how fast students who are learning English as a foreign language learn and conceptualize basic grammar in writing when using Grammarly as opposed to without. This improvement also extended into more complex elements of writing.

These tools focus upon giving the writer quick and immediate feedback and aid. They allow the writer to focus more on what they want to express instead of making sure that they've already expressed it in a way that makes sense syntactically, reducing the amount of cognitive effort required. For people learning the language or new words, these tools also allow them to experiment more with unfamiliar words while ensuring that these experiments contribute to the learning process directly with quick feedback.
### Concerns

One notable concern with these technologies is that they do not allow an accurate representation of an individual's cognitive capability. Further, a similar concern is that some people may come to use one of these tools as a crutch rather than an aid, impairing their ability to write without these tools.