Large Language Model Artificial Intelligence, abbreviated simply as AI here, is a very new service that is being widely discussed for its potential applications in many different sectors. One sector that has been looked into is its ability to aid and improve an individual's [[Writing Enhancement Systems|writing ability]].
### Examples

The most well known example of an AI is [ChatGPT](https://chatgpt.com/), which has had numerous studies conducted into the potential benefits of using it to aid people's writing abilities, both as an alternative [[Evaluation Tools|evaluation tool]] as well as a [[Composition Aids|composition aid]].
### Effectiveness

Studies have shown that it is possible to use ChatGPT to directly aid learning in a number of ways. One of the most important aspects of using AI tools in this way is their ability to prompt the user (Lee et al, 2025). In addition to simply showing the writer what is problematic about what they have written and potential solutions, ChatGPT is, in many cases, able to present examples of how words and grammar should be used in context. This is in addition to consist and quick feedback similar to what other writing aid tools can provide (Zhou et al, 2024)

The greatest advantage AI should theoretically be able to provide when helping improve a writer's abilities is in the offloading of ideation and example creation. Most AIs can both generate example topics to practice either reading or writing on as well as in more general cases, create prompts for the user to write on (Feng et al, 2025). In theory, this would allow a writer to spend less cognitive effort focusing on the topic and more effort focused on implementing and improving their technical writing abilities. 
### Connections

Many studies have been performed to test the use of AI as a potential method of improving a learner's ability to study different languages, and using them to write better is only a single aspect of this. Using AI systems as [[Translation Memory Systems|a translation tool]] for learning to comprehend written text is a common example of this.
### References

- Yang Feng and Xiya Wang. 2025. Exploring the Development of Chinese College Students' Proficiency in English through ChatGPT: An Experimental Study. In Proceedings of the 2024 16th International Conference on Education Technology and Computers (ICETC '24). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 148–154. https://doi-org.ezproxy.library.uvic.ca/10.1145/3702163.3702184
- Hefeifan Li and Lixin Xu. 2025. Personalised Learning Methodologies for University English with the Application of Artificial Intelligence. In Proceeding of the 2024 International Conference on Artificial Intelligence and Future Education (AIFE '24). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 352–357. https://doi-org.ezproxy.library.uvic.ca/10.1145/3708394.3708454
- YuJie Zhou, JunJie Qi, Qiao Zeng, and NingNing Liu. 2024. Research on the Application of WAgent in English Writing Teaching Based on AI Models. In Proceedings of the 2024 9th International Conference on Distance Education and Learning (ICDEL '24). Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA, 10–15. https://doi-org.ezproxy.library.uvic.ca/10.1145/3675812.3675821